JupyterHub documentation (#414)
exasol/ai-lab: doc/user_guide/docker/jupyter-hub.md

# AI Lab in a JupyterHub Environment

[JupyterHub](https://jupyter.org/hub) is a popular way to manage multi-user access 
to Jupyter environments. If your organization is using or planing to use JupyterHub to 
provide different groups of users access to the preconfigured Jupyter environments, you might 
find this document relevant.

This is not a complete detailed manual about JupyterHub setup and configuration - this topic is broad
and well beyond the scope of this document. In addition, support of JupyterHub in AI Lab is 
very experimental and you might encounter some issues and limitations. This document is rather 

> a draft, describing how the AI Lab docker container can be integrate into the JupyterHub environment. 

Author: From my perspective, it is better to clearly set the state of this support, rather than let users to discover themselves :). But would be glad to reformulate this if needed

> a draft, describing how the AI Lab docker container can be integrate into the JupyterHub environment. 

Reviewer: as I wasn't sure anyway, we can leave it as

Where needed, we provide links to the JupyterHub documentation for further reading.
If you face some problems, don't hesitate to file a [bug report](https://github.com/exasol/ai-lab/issues).

## Introduction

[Jupyter Project](https://jupyter.org/) inherently provides a single-user environment. 
Both Jupyter Notebook and the more recent Jupyter Lab use the credentials and environment of the 
user who started the process, without addressing scenarios in which multiple users must share 
resources provided by system administrators.

To mitigate this scenario, [JupyterHub](https://jupyter.org/hub) was created. At a high level,
it provides a web server that offers the following functionality:

* Authentication of users against preconfigured methods (PAM, OAuth, Kerberos, etc.)

> * Allocation required resources (for example, starting virtual machines)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Allocation of required resources (for example, starting virtual machines)
```

* Spawning Jupyter processes for users.
* Managing traffic between users and Jupyter processes.

Together they provide a convenient and flexible open-source tool, which allows administrators to build 
portals for corporate Jupyter users (for example, Data Science teams) or online courses (MOOCs).

A more detailed description of the JupyterHub architecture can be found in 
[A Conceptual Overview of JupyterHub](https://jupyterhub.readthedocs.io/en/stable/explanation/concepts.html) 
document.

## Custom AI Lab image

As the first step in AI Lab integration with JupyterHub, we need to create a custom AI Lab Docker Image, 
which has JupyterHub Python package installed in the AI Lab python environment.
This step is required, as JupyterHub needs to plug into the Jupyter environment and communicate with  
the running Jupyter processes inside the container.

To create a custom AI Lab image, create a file named `Dockerfile` with the following contents:

```dockerfile
FROM exasol/ai-lab:latest
USER root
RUN /home/jupyter/jupyterenv/bin/python3 -m pip install jupyterhub==5.2.1
USER ubuntu
ENTRYPOINT []
```

> Then run the command `docker build -t exasol/ai-lab-hub:latest .` (note the dot at the end of the command).

Reviewer: Use code block instead of inline code

```shell
$ docker images
REPOSITORY              TAG       IMAGE ID       CREATED              SIZE
exasol/ai-lab-hub       latest    8d20c95bc72a   5 seconds ago        3.94GB
```

## JupyterHub configuration

Now it is time to instruct JupyterHub on how to launch our AI Lab instance.
There are many options for how the Jupyter process can be started, but here we'll focus 
on a relatively simple scenario: starting the Docker container on the same machine
where JupyterHub is running.

In JupyterHub's terminology, to allocate resources and start Jupyter, a special entity 
called a "Spawner" is used. JupyterHub comes with many types of spawners, but in our 
case `DockerSpawner` is the most suitable. As its name suggests, it uses docker to 
run a specific instance each time a new user needs a Jupyter environment.

To set up the `DockerSpawner`, you need to add the following lines to the central JupyterHub 
configuration file `jupyterhub_config.py`:

```python
c.JupyterHub.spawner_class = "dockerspawner.DockerSpawner"
c.JupyterHub.hub_connect_ip = 'jupyterhub'
c.DockerSpawner.image = 'exasol/ai-lab-hub:latest'
c.DockerSpawner.network_name = 'jupyterhub'
c.DockerSpawner.remove = True

> c.DockerSpawner.volumes = {"/var/run/docker.sock": "/var/run/docker.sock"}

Reviewer: We probably should create also a volume per user for the notebooks and data. And mention that the docker socket optional is, when user should be able to create docker container. Or, we don't show the docker socket at all, and say, using docker DB with Jupyterhub is not supported.

- instruct DockerSpawner to map the Docker socket into the container to allow the AI Lab to start new containers (which is needed for the Exasol DockerDB to work properly)
- specify the command to start inside the container.

In addition, you might want to mount a per-user (or shared) volume for persistent notebook and data storage (the directory `/home/jupyter/notebooks` inside the AI Lab container).
To achieve this, you will need to add an additional parameter to the `volumes` dictionary, for example:

```python
c.DockerSpawner.volumes = {
    "/var/run/docker.sock": "/var/run/docker.sock",
    "/data/jupyter-hub/{username}": "/home/jupyter/notebooks",
}
```

> More elaborated example is available in [this repository](https://github.com/jupyterhub/jupyterhub-deploy-docker/blob/main/basic-example/jupyterhub_config.py).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A more elaborate example is available in [this repository](https://github.com/jupyterhub/jupyterhub-deploy-docker/blob/main/basic-example/jupyterhub_config.py).
```
